---
layout: post
title: "Bonjour ISBA 2022"
tags: [academiclife]
comments: true
---


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/isba2022.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

The ISBA 2022 conference is over. With 5 days of fully packed talks and posters, and 750 attendees from all over the world, it was truly a statistical gala.

My favorite parts of the conference were the poster sessions rather than the talks. With talks, I can ask at most two questions and that's it, but with posters, I can have much more in-depth discussions with the authors. Over three days I stopped by a dozen posters, learned about topics such as Bayesian joint models and causal machine learning, and made several new friends.

My poster presentation, which happened on Thursday night, was the highlight of my entire trip. In three hours, I talked to 19 people (4 students, 4 postdocs, and 11 professors) about our [ProxMCMC method](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.07378). Some of them wondered how to apply ProxMCMC to other problems, others shared related papers, yet others made observations that are potential directions for future research. The last person I talked to was David Dunson, who asked a bunch of questions and expressed interests in our work. His encouraging words were the perfect ending notes of my presentation.  

One thing I observed from attending several days of talks is that the most successful professors (by citations) are also the ones whose talks are the easiest to follow. No surprise here. Poorly delivered talks prevent many researchers from achieving the impact they deserve. The problem is that presentation skills are not part of the scientific training curriculum and it is very difficult to find truly helpful resources. The only one that I would highly recommend is [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Unzc731iCUY) from Prof. Patrick Winston. Maybe we will make an episode around this topic in our podcast. Drop me an email if you have suggestions! 

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/isba2022-biostat1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/isba2022-biostat2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    UCLA Biostatistics at ISBA 2022
</div>


